Fresh from the Parisian pomp of a presidential inauguration, François Hollande speeds to Berlin on Tuesday for a baptism of fire in Europe's crisis. It's about getting to know one another, Hollande said on Monday of his first ever meeting with Chancellor Angela Merkel. There will be much more besides.

The pressing issue of Greece, for example, as weeks of a power vacuum fuel German exasperation and add to the sense that enough is enough – time for Greece to end its ill-advised sojourn in the single currency.

The Germans and the Greeks have been the opposing poles in the euro crisis for more than two years. Nicolas Sarkozy hitched himself to Merkel and followed the German line.

No one knows yet where Hollande stands, but the signs are he will favour flexibility over German stickling for the rules.

On the broader national and European issues of recession, debt, and fiscal rigour, Hollande has been outspoken and blunt, campaigning as the anti-Sarkozy challenger to Germany's austerity prescriptions. Asked by French TV if he would arrive in Berlin bearing gifts, he replied: "The gift of growth, jobs, and economic activity."

Merkel, by contrast, made clear she saw no reason to shift her position on the European debt dilemmas just because of a weekend election rout for her Christian Democrats.

Hollande goes to Berlin on the first day of his presidency buoyed by a fresh and powerful mandate from the voters of France. Merkel, in office seven years and squaring up for a third term next year, looks diminished by the calamity on Sunday in the big state of North-Rhine Westphalia where her CDU slumped by 8 points to record its worst postwar performance there.

The post-industrial region is highly indebted and the CDU fought a failed campaign arguing for spending cuts and austerity. The opposition Social Democrats and Greens won an absolute majority, begging the question of why the voters of France, Greece, Spain and elsewhere should buy Merkel's policies if the people of Düsseldorf don't.

"No one is buying anything any more in Europe," complained Hollande's party spokesman, Benoît Hamon, on Sunday. "We want Mrs Merkel to hear this message … We didn't have an election to get a European president called Mrs Merkel who has the power to decide everyone else's fate."

On Monday Hollande was much more measured, yet pointed. Tuesday's meeting was "about saying very frankly what we think, not about each other, but about Europe's future … We don't think the same on all subjects. We'll tell each other that so that together we can reach good compromises."

There are plenty of compromises on the cards, to be fleshed out at a special EU summit next week and another one at the end of next month.

The Germans are conceding that they could live with slightly higher inflation at home and more substantive pay rises to help rebalance the eurozone economy by spurring domestic demand. There will be an extra €10bn (£8bn) in subscribed capital for the European Investment Bank to leverage into yet more money for infrastructure projects.

Spare EU structural funds might also be tapped for similar purposes. All of this is broadly seen as positive but either marginal or slow to deliver. It won't fix Greece, put Spain's armies of unemployed back to work, or haul Europe out of stagnation any time soon.

If the Frenchman has the advantage of freshness to the German's slightly jaded air, the underlying reality is of German strength and relative French weakness. The crisis of the past two years has laid bare the myth that the traditional Franco-German relationship at the EU's core is a partnership of equals.

"France has much less clout in the EU than Germany. The financial crisis and the euro crisis have highlighted the vulnerabilities of the French economy: its waning competitiveness," wrote Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform.

Merkel may be weakened at home as a result of the North-Rhine Westphalia defeat and increasingly isolated internationally for her euro policies which are also under fire from Washington and the International Monetary Fund.

But she remains personally popular in Germany and by far the most powerful EU leader. She has no intention of reopening her eurozone fiscal pact, which Hollande has consistently criticised. But the new French leader also looks likely to make a difference.

After years of Merkel and Sarkozy cutting deals in private and then presenting faits accomplis to the rest of Europe, Hollande will be less open to doing Berlin's bidding.

Spain's European commissioner, Joaquín Almunia, predicted in London on Monday that the Franco-German debate over Europe would be "opened up".

"Can Hollande really make a difference? He might," said Grant. "The political crisis in Greece makes it urgent for Merkel and Hollande to find a modus vivendi … Until recently, many German leaders seemed disconcertingly certain that their policies for dealing with the eurozone crisis were absolutely right. Hollande and other EU leaders need to explain to them that an inflexible Germany risks becoming isolated."